The thing that's strange is that I mean
this time last year I think there was a
lot of talk about um you know scaling
eventually hitting a wall about us
running out of data and yet you know
we're recording now Gemini 3 has just
been released and it's leading on this
whole range of different benchmarks. Um
how how has that been possible? like
wasn't there supposed to be a problem
with scaling hitting a wall? I think a
lot of people thought that especially as
other companies are sort of had slower
progress should we say but I think we've
never really seen any wall as such like
what I would say is um maybe there's
like diminishing returns and people when
I say that people think only think like
oh so there's no returns like it's zero
or one it's either exponential or or
it's asmtopic no actually there's a lot
of room between those two regimes and I
think we're in in between those so it's
not like you're going to double the
performance on all the benchmarks every
time you release a new iteration. Maybe
that's what was happening in the early
very early days, you know, 3 4 years
ago. But you are getting significant
improvements like we've seen with Gemini
3 that are well worth the investment and
the return on that investment and doing.
So I that we haven't seen any slowdown
on. There are issues like are we running
out of just available data but there are
ways to get around that you know
synthetic data uh generating your you
know these systems are good enough they
can start generating their own data
especially in certain domains like
coding and math where you can verify the
answer in some sense you could produce
unlimited data so all of these things
though are research questions and I
think that's the advantage that we've
always had is that um we've we've always
been sort of research first and We I
think we have the broadest and deepest
research bench always have done. Um and
if you look back at the last decade of
advances whether that's Transformers or
Alph Go, Alpha Zero, any of the things
we just discussed that they all came out
of Google or DeepMind. So I've always
said like if if more innovations are
needed uh scientific ones then I would
back us to be the place to do it just
like we were you know in the previous
sort of 15 years for a lot of the big
breakthroughs. So I think that's just
what's transpiring and I actually really
like it when the terrain gets harder
because then it's not just world-class
engineering you need which is already
hard enough um but you have to ally that
with worldclass research and science
which is what we specialize in uh and on
top of that we also have the advantage
of worldass infrastructure with our TPUs
and and other things that we've invested
in a lot of for a long time um and so
that combination I think allows us to uh
uh sort of at the frontier of the
innovations as well as the scaling part
and we effectively you can think of as
50 50% of effort is on scaling 50% of it
is on innovation and I think my betting
is you're going to need both to get to
AGI
>> I mean one thing that we are still
seeing even in Gemini 3 which is an
exceptional model is uh this idea of
hallucinations so I think um there
[clears throat] was one metric that said
uh it can still give an answer when
actually it should decline um I mean
could you build a system where Gemini
gives a confidence score in the same way
that Alpha Fold does.
>> Yeah, I think so. And I think we need
that actually. And I think that's sort
of one of the missing things. I think
we're getting close. I think the better
the models get, the more they know about
what they know, if that makes sense. And
so, and I think the more reliable you
could sort of rely on them to actually
introspect in some way or do more
thinking and actually realize for
themselves that they're uncertain or
there's there's there's uncertainty over
this answer. Uh, and then we've got to
sort of work out how to train it in a
way there where it can it can output
that as a as a reasonable answer. Um,
we're getting better at it, but it still
sometimes, you know, [snorts]
it sort of forces itself to answer when
it probably shouldn't. Um, and then that
can lead to a hallucination. So, I
think, you know, a lot of the
hallucinations are of that type
currently. So, there's a missing piece
there that that sort of has to be
solved. And you're right, as we did
solve it with Alpha Fold, but in in
obviously a much more limited way
>> cuz presumably behind the scenes there
is some sort of measure of probability
of whatever the next token might be.
>> Yes, there is of the next token.
[clears throat] That's how it all works.
But that doesn't tell you the overall
arching piece. Is this is you know how
confident are you about this entire fact
or this entire um statement? And I think
that's why you'll need this. I I think
we'll need to use the thinking steps and
the planning steps to go back over what
you just output. At the moment, it's a
little bit like the systems are just
it's like talking to some a person and
they just, you know, when when they're
in on a bad day, they're just literally
telling you the first thing that comes
to their mind. Most most of the time
that would be okay. But then sometimes
when it's a very difficult thing, uh
you'd want to like stop pause for a
moment and maybe go over what you were
about to say and adjust what you were
about to say. Perhaps that's happening
less and less in the world these days,
but um that's still the better way of
having a discourse. So, you know, I
think you can think of it like that.
These models need to do that better.
>> I also really want to talk to you about
um the the simulated worlds and putting
agents in them because we got to talk to
your genie team earlier today. Tell me
why you care about simulation. What What
can a world model do that that a
language model can't?
>> Well, look, I it's it's actually been
it's probably my longest standing
passion is world models and simulations.
uh in addition to AI and of course it's
all coming together in our most recent
work like Genie and I think um language
models are able to understand a lot
about the world I think actually more
than we expected more than I expected
because language is actually probably
richer than we thought it contains more
about the world than we maybe even even
linguists maybe imagined and that's you
know proven now with these new systems
but there's still a lot about the the
spatial dynamics of the world you know
how spatial awareness um and the cont
the physical context we're in um and how
that works mechanically that um isn't is
hard to describe in words and isn't
generally described in in corpuses of of
words and a lot of this is allied to
learning from experience online
experience there's a lot of things which
you can't really describe something you
have to just experience it um maybe the
sensors and so on are very hard to put
into words you know whether that's you
know motor angles and smell and you know
these kind of sensors it's very
difficult to describe that in any kind
of language. So I think there's a whole
set of things around that and I think if
we want robotics to work or a universal
assistant that maybe comes along with
you in your daily life maybe on glasses
or you know on your phone um and helps
you in your everyday life not just on
your computer um you're going to need
this kind of world understanding and uh
world models are at the core of that. So
this what we mean by a world model is
this this sort of model that understands
the causitive and effect of of the
mechanics of the world right intuitive
physics but um how things move how
things behave um now we're seeing a lot
of that in our video models actually and
one way to show how do you test you have
that kind of understanding well can you
generate realistic worlds because if you
can generate it then in a sense you must
have understood uh uh the system must
have encapsulated a lot of the mechanics
of the world. So that's why Genie and VO
and these models are our video models
and our sort of interactive world models
are really uh impressive but also
important steps towards showing we have
generalized world models. And then
hopefully some point we can apply it to
you know robotics and and and universal
assistance. And then of course, one of
my favorite things I'm definitely going
to have to do at some point is
reapplying it back to games and and uh
you know, game simulations and create
the ultimate games, which of course was
maybe always my subconscious plan.
[laughter]
>> Those worlds that you're creating
though, how do you make sure that they
really are realistic? I mean, how do you
ensure that you don't end up with
physics that looks plausible but is
actually wrong?
>> Yeah, it that's that's a great question
and and and and can be an issue. This
basically hallucinations again. So some
hallucinations are good because because
you it also means you you might create
something interesting and new. So in
fact sometimes if you're trying to do
creative things or trying to get your
system to create new things novel things
um a bit of hallucination might be good
but you want it to be intentional right
so not uh so you kind of switch on the
hallucinations now right or the the
creative um exploration but yes with
with the with when you're trying to
train a simmer agent you don't want
genie hallucinating kind of physics that
are wrong. So actually what we're doing
now is we're almost creating a phys
physics benchmark where um we can use
game engines which are very accurate
with physics to create lots of like um
fairly simple like the sorts of things
you would do in your physics A level uh
lab uh lessons right like you know
rolling little balls down different
tracks and seeing how fast they go and
so like really teasing apart on a very
basic uh level like Newton's three laws
of motion has it encapsulated it um
whether that's VO or Genie, have these
models encapsulated the physics of that
100% accurately? And right now they're
not. They're kind of approximations and
they look um realistic when you just
casually look at them, but they're not
uh they're not accurate enough yet to
rely on for say robotics. So that's the
next step. So I think now we've got
these really interesting models. I think
one of the things just like we're trying
with all of our models is to reduce the
hallucinations and make them even more
uh grounded. Um, and with physics, I
think that's going to probably involve
generating loads and loads of ground
truth, simple videos of pendulums, you
know, what happens when two pendulums go
around each other. But then very
quickly, you get to like three body
problems which are not solvable anyway.
So, I think it's going to be
interesting. But what's amazing already
is when you look at the the video models
like VO and just the way it treats
reflections and liquids, it's pretty
unbelievably accurate already, at least
to the naked eye. So the next step is
actually going beyond what a human can
amateur can perceive and uh would it
really hold up to a proper physics grade
experiment?
>> You've estimated that we'll have AGI by
2030. Um so there's interesting
questions around that. How will we
actually know that we got there? Uh and
uh what maybe the move quote move 37 of
AGI? My estimate is sort of 50% chance
by in the next 5 years. So you know by
2030 let's say and uh so I think there's
a good chance that that could happen.
Part of it is what what is your
definition of AGI? Of course, people are
arguing about that now and and uh mine's
quite a high bar and always has been of
like can we match the cognitive
functions that the brain has, right? So,
we know our brains are pretty much
general cheuring machines approximate
and of course we created incredible
modern civilization with our minds. So,
that also speaks to how general the
brain is. And um for us to know we have
a true AGI, we would have to like make
sure that it has all those capabilities.
is it isn't kind of a jagged
intelligence where some things it's
really good at like today's systems but
other things it's really uh flawed at
and and that's what we currently have
with today's systems they're not
consistent so you'd want that
consistency of intelligence across the
board and then we have some missing I
think capabilities like sort of uh the
true invention capabilities and
creativity that we were talking about
earlier so you'd want to see those how
you test that um I think you just test
it one way to do it would be a kind of
brute force test of tens of thousand
thousand of cognitive tasks that um you
know we know that humans can do uh and
maybe also make the system available to
uh a few hundred of the world's top
experts uh the terren towels of each
each subject area and see if they can
find you know give them give them a
month or two and see if they can find an
obvious flaw in the system and if they
can't then I think you're you're pretty
uh you know pretty you can be pretty
confident we have a fully general system
>> maybe to push back a little bit it seems
Sounds like humans are really incredible
as the the intelligence improves across
all domains to take it for granted.
>> Mhm.
>> Uh like you mentioned Terrence Tao
uh these brilliant experts they might
quickly in a span of weeks take for
granted all the incredible things it can
do and then focus in well haha right
there. You know I I consider myself
first of all human.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh second [laughter]
I I identify as human. Um
I you know some people listen to me talk
and they're like that guy is not good at
talking the stuttering the you know so
like even humans have obvious across
domains limits even just outside of
mathematics and physics and so on
>> it I I I wonder if it will take
something like a move 37 so on the
positive side versus like
>> a barrage of 10,000 cognitive tasks
where it would be one or two where it's
like yes, holy this is
>> so I think Exactly. So I think there's
the sort of blanket testing to just make
sure you got the consistency, but I
think there are the sort of lighthouse
moments like the move 37 that I would be
looking for. So one would be inventing a
new conjecture or a new hypothesis about
physics like Einstein did. So maybe you
could even run the back test of that
very rigorously like have a cut off of
knowledge cutoff of 1900 and then give
the system everything that was you know
that was written up to 1900 and then and
then see if it could come up with
special relativity and general
relativity right like Einstein did that
that would be an interesting test
another one would be can it invent a
game like go not just come up with move
37 a new strategy but can it invent a
game that's as deep as aesthetically
beautiful as elegant as go and those the
sorts of things I would be looking out
for uh and probably a system being able
to do uh uh several of those things
right for it to be very general um not
just one domain and so I think that
would be the signs at least that I would
be looking for that we've got a system
that's a GI level and then maybe to fill
that out you would also check the
consistency you know make sure there's
no holes in that system either
>> yeah something like a new conjecture or
scientific discovery that would be a
cool feeling
>> yeah that would Amazing. So, it's not
not just helping us do that, but
actually coming up with something brand
new.
>> And you would be in the room for that.
So, it would be like
>> probably 2 or 3 months before announcing
it.
>> Mhm.
>> And you would just be sitting there
trying not to tweet [laughter]
>> something like that. Exactly. It's like
what is this amazing new, you know,
physics idea? And then we' probably
check it with world experts in that
domain, right? And validate it and kind
of go through its workings. And it I
guess it would be explaining its
workings too. Um yeah be an amazing
moment.
>> Do you worry that we as humans even
expert humans like you might miss it?
Might
>> miss
>> it may be pretty complicated. So it
could be the analogy I give there is I
don't think it will be um uh uh totally
mysterious to the to the best human
scientists but it may be a bit like for
example in chess if I was to talk to
Gary Kasparov or Magnus Carlson and play
a game with them and they make a
brilliant move I might not be able to
come up with that move but they could
explain why afterwards that move made
sense and we would be able to understand
it to some degree not to the level they
do but in you know if they were good at
explaining which is actually part part
of intelligence too is being able to
explain in a simple way that what you're
thinking about. Um uh I I think that
that would be very possible for the best
human scientists.
>> But I wonder maybe you can you can
educate me on the side of go. I wonder
if there's moves for Agnes or Gary where
they at first will dismiss it as a bad
move.
>> Yeah, sure it could be. But then
afterwards they'll figure out with their
intuition that that this why this works.
And then and then and then empirically
the nice thing about games is one of the
great things about games is you can it's
a sort of scientific test. Does it do
you win the game or not win? And then um
that tells you okay that move in the end
was good. That strategy was good. And
then you can go back and analyze that
and and and and explain even to yourself
a little bit more why explore around it.
And that's how chess analysis and things
like that work. So perhaps that's why my
brain works like that cuz I I've been
doing that since I was four and you're
train you know it's sort of hardcore
training in that way.
>> So I have I have an anal a human analogy
which might be helpful. So even the case
let's take the case of competitive
programming since you mentioned that and
suppose you have two students one of
them work decided they want to be the
best competitive programmer so they will
practice 10,000 hours for that domain
>> they will solve all the problems
memorize all the proof techniques and be
very very you know
be very skilled at quickly and correctly
implementing all the algorithms and by
doing by doing so they became
the best one of the best student number
two thought oh competitive programming
is cool maybe they practiced for 100
hours
>> much much less and they also did really
well which one do you think is going to
do better in their career later on
>> the second
>> right and I think that's basically
what's going on the models are much more
like the first student but even more
because then we say okay so the model
should be good at competitive
programming so let's get every single
competitive programming problem ever and
then let's do some data augmentation So
we have even more competitive
programming problems.
>> Yes.
>> And we train on that. And so now you got
this great competitive programmer. And
with this analogy, I think it's more
intuitive. I think it's more intuitive
with this analogy that Yeah. Okay. So if
it's so well trained, okay, it's like
all the different algorithms and all the
different proof techniques are like
right at it at its fingertips
and it's more intuitive that with this
level of preparation, it not would not
necessarily generalize to other things.
M
but then what is the um analogy for what
the second student is doing before they
do the 100 hours of fine-tuning.
>> I think it's like
they have it. I think it's the it
factor.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. And like I know like when I was
in undergrad I remember there was there
was a student like this that studied
with me. So I know I know it exists.
>> Yeah. I think it's interesting to
distinguish it from whatever
pre-training does. So, one way to
understand what you just said about we
don't have to choose the data in
pre-training is to say actually it's not
dissimilar to the 10,000 hours of
practice. It's just that you get that
10,000 hours of practice for free
because it's already somewhere in the
pre-training distribution, but it's like
maybe you're suggesting actually there's
actually not that much generalization
for pre-training. There's just so much
data in pre-training. Everybody's like
it's not necessarily generalizing better
than RL.
>> Like the main the main strength of
pre-training is that there is a so much
of it. Yeah.
>> And B, you don't have to think hard
about what data to put into
pre-training.
>> And it's a very kind of natural data and
it does include in it a lot of what
people do.
>> Yeah.
>> People's thoughts and a lot of the
features of, you know, it's like the
whole world as projected by people onto
text.
>> Yeah.
>> And pre-training tries to capture that
using a huge amount of data.
It's it's very the pre-training is very
difficult to reason about because it's
so hard to understand the manner in
which the model relies on pre-training
data and whenever the model makes a
mistake could it be because something by
chance is not as supported by the
pre-training data you know and pre
support by pre-training is maybe a loose
term
I I don't know if I can add anything
more useful on this but
I don't think there is a human analog to
pre-training.
>> People have been talking about scaling
data, scaling parameters, scaling
compute.
Is there a more general way to think
about scaling? What are the other
scaling axes?
So
the thing so so here here is a
perspective here's a perspective I think
might be might be true.
So
the way ML used to work is that people
would just think of it with stuff and
try to
and try to get interesting results.
That's what's been going on in the past.
Then
the scaling insight arrived, right?
scaling laws GPT3
and suddenly everyone realized we should
scale
and it's just this this is an example of
how language affects thought
scaling is what just one word but it's
such a powerful word because it informs
people what to do they say okay let's
let's try to scale things and so you say
okay so what are we scaling and
pre-training was a thing to scale it was
a particular scale failing recipe.
>> Yes.
>> The big breakthrough of pre-training is
the realization that this recipe is
good. So you say, hey, if you mix some
compute with some data into a neural net
of a certain size, you will get results
and you will know that you'll be better
if you just scale the recipe up. And
this is also great. Companies love this
because it gives you a very uh lowrisk
way of investing
>> your resources.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. It's much harder to invest your
resources in research. Compare that. You
know, if you research, you need to have
like go forth researchers and research
and come up with something versus get
more data, get more compute, you know,
you'll get something from pre-training.
And indeed, you know, it looks like I
based on various um
um things people say on some people say
on Twitter, maybe it appears that Gemini
have found a way to get more out of
pre-training. At some point though,
pre-training will run out of data. The
data is very clearly finite. And so
then, okay, what do you do next? Either
you do some kind of a souped-up
pre-training, different recipe from the
one you've done before, or you're doing
a RL or maybe something else. But now
that compute is big, computer is now
very big. In some sense, we are back to
the age of research. So maybe here's
another way to put it. Up until 2020,
from 20 from 20 2012 to 2020, it was the
age of research. Now from 2020 to 2025,
it was the age of scaling or maybe plus
minus. Let's add arrow bars to those
years because people say this is
amazing. You got to scale more. Keep
scaling. The one word scaling. But now
the scale is so big. Like is is it is
the belief really that oh it's so big
but if you had 100x more everything
would be so different. Like it would be
different for sure but like is the
belief that if you just 100x the scale
everything would be transformed.
I don't think that's true. So it's back
to the age of research again just with
big computers.
>> That's a very interesting way to put it.
But let me ask you the question you just
posed then. What are we scaling and what
what is what would it mean to have a
recipe? Because I guess I'm not aware of
a very clean
relationship that almost looks like a
law of physics which existed in
pre-training was a power law between
data or computer parameters and loss.
What is the kind of relationship we
should be seeking and how how should we
think about what this new recipe might
look like? So, we've we've already
witnessed a transition from
one type of scaling to a different type
of scaling, from pre-training to RL.
Now, people are scaling RL. Now, based
on what people say on Twitter, they
spend more compute on RL than on
pre-training at this point because RL
can actually consume quite a bit of
compute. You know, you do very very long
rollouts.
>> Yes. So it takes a lot of compute to
produce those rollouts and then you get
relatively small amount of learning per
roll out. So you really can spend you
really can spend a lot of compute and I
could imagine like I wouldn't at this at
this st it's it's more like I wouldn't
even call it a scale um scaling I would
say hey like what are you doing and is
the thing you are doing the the the the
most productive thing you could be
doing? Yeah.
>> Can you find a most more productive way
of using your compute? We've discussed
the value function business earlier and
maybe once people get good at value
functions they will be using their their
um resources more productively
and if you find a whole other way of
training models you could say is this
scaling or is it just using your
resources I think it becomes a little
bit ambiguous in a sense that when
people were in the age of research back
then it was like people say hey let's
try this and this and this let's try
that and that and that oh look something
interesting is happening and I think
there will be a return to that.
>> So if we're back in the era of research,
stepping back, what is the part of the
recipe that we need to think most about?
When you say value function, people are
already trying the current recipe, but
then having LLM as a judge and so forth,
you could say that's a value function,
but it sounds like you have something
much more fundamental in mind. Do we
need do we need to go back to
should we even rethink pre-training at
all and not just add more steps to the
end of that process?
>> Yeah. So the the the the discussion
about value function I think it was
interesting. I want to like emphasize
that I think the value function is
something like
it's going to make RL more efficient
and I think that makes a difference. But
I think that anything you can do with a
value function you can do without just
more slowly.
>> Mhm.
>> The thing which I think is the most
fundamental is that these models somehow
just generalize dramatically worse than
people.
>> Yes.
>> And it's super obvious.
That's that seems like a very
fundamental thing.
>> Okay, so this is the crux of
generalization and there's two
sub questions.
There's one which is about sample
efficiency which is why should it take
so much more data for these models to
learn than humans. There's a second
about even separate from the amount of
data it takes, there's a question of why
is it so hard to teach the thing we want
to a model than to a human which is to
say for to a human that we don't
necessarily need a verifiable reward to
be able to
you're probably mentoring a bunch of
researchers right now and you're you
know talking with them you're showing
them your code and you're showing them
how you think and from that they're
picking up your way of thinking and how
they should do research. You don't have
to set like a verifiable reward for them
that's like okay this is the next part
of the curriculum and now this is the
next part of your curriculum and oh it
was this training was unstable and we
gota there's not this shleppy bespoke
process. So perhaps these two issues are
actually related in some way but I'd be
curious to
explore this this second thing which
feels more like continual learning and
this first thing which feels just like
um sample efficiency.
>> Yeah. So you know you could actually
wonder one one possible explanation for
the human sample efficiency that needs
to be considered is evolution
and evolution has given us a small
amount of the mo the most useful
information possible
and for things like vision
hearing and locomotion
I think there's a pretty strong case
that evolution actually has given us a
lot. Mhm.
>> So for example, human dexterity far
exceeds I mean robots can become
dexterous too if you subject them to
like a huge amount of training in
simulation. But to train a robot in the
real world to quickly like pick up a new
skill like a person does seems very out
of reach. And here you could say, oh
yeah, like locomotion all our ancestors
needed great locomotion squirrels like
so locomotion maybe like we've got like
some unbelievable prior. You could make
the same case for vision. You know, I I
believe Yan Lakhan made the point, oh,
like um children learn to drive after 16
hour after like 10 hours of practice,
which is true, but our vision is so
good. At least for me, when I remember
myself being 5 years old, my I was I was
very excited about cars back then, and
I'm pretty sure my car recognition was
more than adequate for self-driving
already. As a 5-year-old, you don't get
to see that much data as a 5-year-old.
You spend most of your time in your
parents house, so you have very low data
diversity, but you could say maybe
that's evolution, too. But then language
and math and coding, probably not.
>> It still seems better than models. I
mean, obviously models are better than
the average human at language and math
and coding, but are they better at the
average human at learning?
>> Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Absolutely. What I
meant to say is that language math and
coding and especially math and coding
suggests that whatever it is that makes
people
good at learning
is probably not so much a complicated
prior but something more some
fundamental thing.
>> Wait, I'm not sure understood. Why
should that be the case? So consider a
skill
that people exhibit some kind of great
reliability or you know um
>> if the skill is one that was very useful
to our ancestors for many millions of
years, hundreds of millions of years,
you could say you could argue that maybe
humans are good at it because of
evolution because we have a prior
>> an evolutionary prior that's encoded in
some very nonobvious way.
>> Yeah.
>> That somehow makes us so good at it.
>> But if people exhibit great ability,
reliability, robustness, ability to
learn in a domain that really did not
exist until recently,
then this is more an indication that
people might have
just better machine learning period.
>> Mhm. But then how should we think about
what that is? Is it a matter of
Yeah. What is the ML analogy for what?
There's a couple interesting things
about it. It takes fewer samples. It's
more unsupervised. You don't have to set
a ver like a child learning to drive a
car. Children are not learning to drive
a car. A teenager learning how to drive
a car is like not exactly getting
some pre-built verifiable reward.
it comes from their interaction with the
machine and the with the environment. Um
and yet it takes much fewer samples. It
seems more unsupervised. It seems more
robust. Much more robust. The robustness
of people is really staggering.
>> Yeah. So like Okay. And do you have a
unified way of thinking about why are
all these things happening at once? What
is the ML analogy that would that could
be could realize something like this?
So, so, so, um, this is where, you know,
one of the things that you've been
asking about is how can, you know, the
teenage driver kind of self-correct and
learn from their experience without an
external teacher.
>> And the answer is well, they have their
value function,
>> right? They have a general sense which
is also by the way extremely robust in
people like
whatever it is the human value function
whatever the human value function is
with a few exceptions around addiction
it's actually very very robust
and so for something like a teenager
that's learning to drive they start to
drive and they already have a sense of
how they're driving immediately how
badly they're unconfident and then they
See? Okay. And they and then of course
the the learning speed of any teenager
is so fast after 10 hours you're good to
go.
>> Yeah. It seems like humans has some
solution, but I'm curious about like
well how are they doing it and like why
is it so hard to like how do we need to
reconceptualize the way we're training
models to make something like this
possible?
>> You know that is a great question to ask
and it's a question I have a lot of
opinions about.
But unfortunately
we live in a world where not not all
machine learning ideas are discussed
freely and this is this is one of them.
So there's probably a way to do it.
I think it can be done. The fact that
people are like that I think it's a
proof that it can be done. There may be
another blocker though which is there is
a possibility
that the human neurons actually do more
compute than we think. And if that is
true and if that plays an important role
then things might be more difficult. But
regardless I do think it points to the
existence of some [snorts]
machine learning principle
that I have opinions on. But
unfortunately, circumstances make it
hard to to discuss in detail. Even
though
>> nobody nobody listens to this podcast, I
[laughter]
>> Yeah,
we are not going to get to human level
AI by just scaling up MLMs. This is just
not going to happen. Okay,
>> that's your perspective.
>> There's no way. Okay, absolutely no way.
Um and and whatever you can hear from
some of my uh more adventurous
colleagues uh is not going to happen
within the next two years. There's
absolutely no way in hell to you know
pardon my French um the you know the
idea that we we're going to have you
know a country of genius in a data
center. There's complete BS right
there's absolutely no way. What we're
going to have maybe is systems that are
trained on sufficiently large amounts of
data that any question that any
reasonable person may ask will will find
an answer through those systems. And it
would feel like you have, you know, a
PhD sitting next to you, but it's not a
PhD you have next to you. It's, you
know, a system with gigantic uh memory
and retrieval ability, not not a system
that can invent solutions to to new
problems. Um, which is really what a PhD
is. Okay, this is actually
>> it's it's you know connected to this
post that uh Tomul
made that uh um you you you you
inventing new things you know requires
uh
the the a type of skill and abilities
that uh you're not going to get from
from from Adams. So um
so there's a big question which is the
investment that is being done now is not
done for tomorrow. It's not is is done
for you know the next few years and most
of the investment at least for from the
meta side is investment in uh
infrastructure for inference. Okay. So
let's imagine that by the end of the
year, which is really the planet Ma, we
have 1 billion users of MAI through
smart glasses, you know, standalone app
and and whatever. Um, you got to serve
those people and that's a lot of
computation. So that's why you need, you
know, a lot of investment in
infrastructure to be able to scale this
up and, you know, build it up over
months or years. Um,
and so that, you know, that's where most
of the money is going.
um um at least on on you know on the
side of companies like like like Mida,
Microsoft and and and Google and
potentially Amazon. Um
then there is so this is just operations
essentially. Now is there going to be
the the market for um you know one
billion people using those things
regularly even if there is no change of
paradigm and the answer is probably yes.
So you know even if the revolution of a
new paradigm doesn't come you know
within 3 years this infrastructure is
going to be used is there's very little
question about that. Okay. So it's a
good investment and it takes so long to
set up you know data centers and all
that stuff that you need to to get
started now and plan for you know
progress to be continuous uh so that uh
you know eventually the investment is is
justified but you can't afford not to do
it right because um because it would be
too much of a of a risk to take if you
have the cash
>> and what do you think are the missing
parts here like do you think like more
compute will help or like we need better
algorithms or like it's kind of like do
you believe in the bitter lessons right
like do you think
>> well and and furthermore what do you
think about you know the data quality
problems with the internet post 2022
right I've heard people compare it to
low background steel now to refer to all
that data before LLM came out like low
background tokens I mean
>> okay
>> I think I'm totally escaping that
problem okay here's the here's the thing
and I've I've been you know using this
argument publicly uh over the That's
complet uh training an LLM uh if you
wanted to have any kind of you know
decent performance requires training on
basically all the available freely
available text on the internet plus some
you know synthetic data plus license
data etc. So a typical LM like you know
three you [clears throat] know going
back a year or two is trained on 30
trillion tokens. A token is typically
three bytes. So that's 10 to the 14
bytes for pre-training. Okay, we're not
talking about fine tuning.
um 10^ the 14 bytes
and for the L&Ms to be able to really
kind of exploit this um they need to
have a lot of memory storage because
basically those are isolated facts.
There is a little bit of redundancy in
text but but a [clears throat] lot of it
is just isolated facts, right? Um and so
you need a lot of you need very big
networks because you need a lot of
memory to [clears throat] store all
those facts uh and regurgitate them.
Okay. And I compare this with uh video.
Um 10^ the 14 bytes if you count uh 2
megabytes per second uh for video for
you know relatively [snorts] compressed
video. Not highly compressed but a bit
that would represent 15,000 hours of
video
10^ the 14 bytes. In 15,000 hours of
video you have the same amount of data
as the entirety of all the text
available on the internet. Now, 15,000
hours of video is absolutely nothing.
It's 30 minutes of YouTube uploads.
Okay? It's the amount of visual
information that a four-year-old has
seen in uh his or her life. Entire life
waking time is about 16,000 hours in
four years. [snorts] Um it's not a much
it's not a lot of information. We have
video models now vapa vja 2 actually
that just came out last summer.
>> [snorts]
>> um that was trained on the equivalent of
a century of video data and it's all
public data okay much more data but much
less than the biggest L&M actually
because even though it's it's more bytes
it's more redundant so you say okay it's
more redundant so it's less useful
actually when you use self-s supervised
learning you do need redundancy you
cannot run anything
>> in self-s supervised or anything by the
way uh if it's completely random
redundancy is what you can learn. And so
um so there's just much richer structure
in uh you know real world data like
video than there is in text which kind
of led me to claim that we absolutely
never ever going to get to human level
AI by just training on text.
It's just never going to happen. Right?
So [snorts] the it's this big debate in
philosophy of whether AI should be
grounded in reality or whether it could
be just you know in the realm of
symbolic manipulation and things like
this. Well, and when [clears throat] we
talk about for world models and
grounding, I think, you know, there's
still a lot of people who who don't even
understand what the idealized world
model is in a sense, right? So, for
example, I'm influenced by having
watched Star Trek, which I would hope
you've seen a little bit of in thinking
of the holidays, right? I always thought
that the holiday was like an idealized
perfect world model, right? Even so many
episodes of it going too far, right? And
people walking out of it, right? But it,
you know, it even simulates things like
smell and physical touch. So, do you
think that something like that is like
the idealized world model or do you
think like a different model or or like
way of of defining it would be?
>> Okay, this is an excellent question. Uh,
and the reason excellent is because it
put it goes to the core of of really
what uh
you know what I think we should be
doing, which I'm doing and you know how
wrong I think everybody else is. Okay.
[laughter] So, so people think,
you know, think that a world model is
something that reproduces all details of
what the world does. They think of it as
a simulator.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. And of course, because, you know,
deep learning is the thing, you're going
to use some deep learning system as a
simulator. A lot of people also are
focused on video generation, which is
kind of a cool thing, right? You you
produce those cool videos and wow, you
know, people are sort of really
impressed by them. Now, there's no
guarantee whatsoever that when you train
a video generation system, it actually
has an accurate model of the underlying
dynamics of the world that it's learned
anything, you know, particularly
abstract about it. [snorts]
>> Um, and so, so the idea that somehow a
model needs to reproduce every detail of
the of reality
is wrong and hurtful.
>> And and [clears throat] I'm going to
tell you why. Okay. Uh
a good example of simulation is uh CFD,
computational fluid dynamics. It's used
all the time. People use supercomputers
for that, right? So you want to simulate
the flow of air around an airplane
>> you you know cut up the space into
little cubes. uh and within each cube
you you have a small vector that
represents the state of that cube which
is uh you know velocity
density or mass and uh temperature and
maybe a couple other things right so and
then you solve stokes equations which
are which is a differential uh partial
differential equation
u and you can simulate the flow of air
now the thing is this does not actually
necessarily solve the equations very
accurately. If you have chaotic behavior
like turbulences and stuff like that,
simulation is only, you know,
approximately correct. Um, but in fact,
that's already an abstract
representation of the underlying
phenomenon. The underlying phenomenon is
molecules of air that bump into each
other and bump on the on the wing and on
the airplane, right? But nobody ever
goes to that level to do the simulation.
That would be crazy, right? It would
require an amount of computation that's
just insane and it would depend on the
initial condition. I mean, there's
there's all kinds of reasons we don't do
this. And maybe it's not molecules.
Maybe it's, you know, at a lower level,
we should simulate particles and like,
you know, do the five diagrams and
simulate, you know, you know, all the
different paths that those particles are
employing because they don't take one
path, right? It's not classical, it's
quantum, right?
>> Yeah. Um so at the bottom it's like
quantum field theory and probably
already that is an abstract
representation of the reality. So
[laughter]
um so you know everything that takes
place between us at the moment in
principle can be described through
quantum field theory. Okay, we would
just have to measure the wave function
of the universe in a you know a cube
that you know contains all of us and
even that would not be sufficient
because there are untangle particles at
the other side of the universe that you
know we have so it wouldn't be
sufficient but let's imagine okay for
the sake of uh of uh of the argument
first of all we would not be able to
measure this uh wave function um and
second of all the amount of computition
we would need to devote to this is
absolutely gigantic. It was would be
some gigantic quantum computer that you
know is the size of the earth or
something. Um so no way we can we can
describe anything at that level. And
it's very likely that our simulation
would be accurate for maybe a few
nanoseconds.
>> Yeah.
>> You know beyond that we'll we'll diverge
uh from reality. So what do we do? We
invent abstractions. We invent
abstractions like particles,
atoms, molecules. in the living world is
proteins, organels, cells,
organs, organisms,
>> societies, ecosystems, etc. Right? Um,
and basically every level in this
hierarchy ignores a lot of details about
the level below. And what that that
allows us to do is make longer term,
more reliable, longerterm predictions.
Okay? So we can describe the dynamics
between us now in terms of the
underlying science and in terms of
psychology. Okay, that's a much much
higher level of abstraction than
particle physics, right? Um and in fact,
you know, every level in the hierarchy I
just I just uh mentioned is a different
field of science. A field of science is
essentially defined by the level of
abstraction at which you start making
predictions, right? That you allow
yourself to use to make predictions. Um,
in fact, physicists have this down to an
art uh in the sense that um, you know,
if I give you a a box full of gas,
um, you could in principle simulate all
the molecules of the gas, right? Uh, but
nobody ever does this. But at a very
abstract level, we can say, you know, PV
equals NRT, right? you know pressure
times volume equals you know number of
particle times you know temperature blah
blah blah and uh so you know that at a
you know global emergent
phenomenological
level if you increase the pressure the
temperature will go up or if you
increase the temperature the pressure
will go up right uh or if you let some
particles out then the pressure will go
down and blah blah blah right so um so
we all the time we build
phenomenological models of something
complicated by ignoring all kinds of
details that physicists call entropy.
[laughter]
Um
but uh but it's really systematic.
That's the way we understand the world.
We you know we we do not memorize every
detail of uh we certainly don't
reconstruct it of what we perceive.
>> So world models don't have to be
simulators at all. Well, there are
simulators but in abstract
representation space and what they
simulate is only the relevant part of
reality. Okay, if I ask you where is
Jupiter going to be 100 years from now,
I mean we have a an enormous amount of
information about Jupiter, right? But
within this whole information that we
have about Jupiter to be able to make
that prediction where Jupiter is going
to be 100 years from now, you need
exactly six numbers, three positions and
three velocities and the rest doesn't
matter. M
>> so you don't believe in synthetic data
sets?
>> I do. No, it's useful [clears throat] u
you know data from games. I mean there's
certainly a lot of things that you learn
uh from synthetic data from you know
from from games and things like I mean
you know children learn a huge amount
from from play which basically are kind
of simulations you know the the world a
little bit [laughter] right
>> but but in conditions where they can't
kill themselves. But I I I worry at
least for video games that for example
the green screen like actors doing the
animations they're doing extremely it's
designed to look good you know for like
an often
>> badass I guess for an action game but
these often don't correspond very well
to reality and so I I worry that like a
physical system that's you know been
trained or through or with the
assistance of world models might get
similar quirks at least in the very
short term. Is this something that
worries you?
>> No, it depends on what level you train
them. So, for example, I mean, sure, if
you use a very accurate robotic
simulator, for example, right, it's
going to accurately simulate the
dynamics of an arm, uh, you know, when
you apply torqus to it, it's going to
move in a particular way. There's
dynamics, no problem. Now, simulating
the friction that happens, you know,
when you grab an object and manipulate
it, that's super hard [clears throat]
>> to do it accurately. Friction is very
hard to simulate.
>> Okay? And so those simulators are not
particularly accurate for uh
manipulation. They're good enough that
you know you can train a system to do it
and then you can do you know seem to
real uh with a little bit of adaptation.
Uh so that that can work but but it's
not I mean the point is much more
important like for example there's a lot
of completely basic things about the
world that we completely take for
granted which we can learn at a very
abstract level but it's not language
related. Okay. So the fact for example
and I've used this example before and
people made fun of me for it but it's
really true. Okay, I have those objects
on the table
>> and the fact that when I push the table,
the object moves with it.
>> Like this is something we learned. It's
not something that you're born with.
Okay, the fact that
>> most objects will fall when you let let
them go, right, with gravity. Maybe
[clears throat] learn this around the
age of nine months.
>> Uh and the reason people make fun of me
with this is because I said, you know,
L&Ms don't understand this kind of
stuff, right? Uh and they and they
absolutely do not even today. But but
you can train them to give the right
answer when you ask them a question. You
know, if I put an object on the table
and I push the table, uh what will
happen to the object? It will answer the
object moves with it. But because it's
been fine tuned to do that okay so it's
more like regurgitation that sort of
real understanding of the underlying
dynamics. But if you look on I don't
know sur like nano
and nano banana they have like good
physics of the world right they are not
perfect physics
>> they have some physics but so do you
think like we can push it farther or do
you think like it's a one way to to
learn physics
>> so all of those models actually make
predictions in representation space they
use the diffusion transformers and that
predict that um the the the computation
of of the the video snippet at an
abstract level is done in representation
space. Okay, not always autogressively
by the way. Sometimes it's just in
parallel. And then there's a second
diffusion model that turns this abstract
representations
into a nicel looking video
and that might be m collapse. We don't
know, right? Because we can't really
measure like the coverage of such
systems with reality. Um but but like
you know the to the the the previous
point I can train
like here is another completely obvious
concept to us that we don't even imagine
that we learn but we do learn it. A
person cannot be in two places at the
same time.
>> Okay.
Like we learn this because very early on
we learn object permanence. The fact
that when an object disappear still
exist. Okay. Okay. And we appear it's
the same object that you saw before.
>> Um
[snorts] how can we train an AI system
to learn this concept? So object
permanence, you know, you just show it a
lot of videos where objects, you know,
go behind a screen and then reappear on
the other side or where they go behind a
screen and the screen goes away and the
object is still there. And when you show
four months old babies scenarios where
things like this are violated,
their eyes [snorts] open like super big
and they're like super surprised because
reality just, you know, violated their
internal model. Same thing when you show
a scenario of like a little car on the
platform, you push it off the platform
and it appears to float in the air. Um,
they also look at it, you know, 9
months, 10 months old babies look at it
like really surprised. six month old
baby barely pay attention because they
haven't learned about gravity yet. Uh so
they haven't been able to like you know
incorporate the notion that every object
is supposed to fall. So this kind of
learning is really what's uh what's uh
what's important and you do this you can
learn this from very abstract things you
know the same way uh babies learn about
like you know social interactions by you
know being told stories with like simple
pictures. It's a simulation, an abstract
simulation of the world, but it sort of
learns them, you know, particular
behavior. So, you could imagine like
training a system from, let's say, an
adventure game, like a top down 2D
adventure game
>> where, [clears throat] you know, you you
you tell your character like, you know,
move north and he goes to the other room
and it's not in the first room anymore
because it moved to the other room,
right? Of course, in adventure game, you
have Gandalf that you can call and he
just appears, right? That's not
physical, but um but like when you pick
up a key from a you know from a treasure
chest, you have the key. No one else can
have it and you can use it to open a
door. In fact, there's a lot of things
that you learn that are very basic, you
know, even in sort of abstract
environments.